[Core] 1.9 upgrade guide (#6184)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/06-upgrading-to-v1.9.md

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.9 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.9
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.9
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---

>  

Reviewer: do we add any sort of callout that this is "beta" - or is the title clear enough?

Author: @graciegoheen The version drop down will also show beta. I think this will be fine and is what we've done previously but open to adding a note. Let me know if you feel strongly pro note! Here's how it [looks now](https://docs-getdbt-com-git-upgrade-19-guide-dbt-labs.vercel.app/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/upgrading-to-v1.9).

Reviewer: If this is what we've done before, that's fine with me!

## Resources 

- [dbt Core 1.9 changelog](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/1.9.latest/CHANGELOG.md)
- [dbt Core CLI Installation guide](/docs/core/installation-overview)

> - [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud)

Reviewer: should we specifically send folks to the versionless section?

Author: Ooh good call! 
```suggestion
- [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless)
```

## What to know before upgrading

> dbt Labs is committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x, except for any changes explicitly mentioned in this guide or as a [behavior change flag](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt Labs is committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x. Any behavior changes will be accompanied by a [behavior change flag](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags) to provide a migration window for existing projects. If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).
```

dbt Cloud is now [versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/versionless-cloud). If you have selected "Versionless" in dbt Cloud, you already have access to all the features, fixes, and other functionality that is included in dbt Core v1.9.
For users of dbt Core, since v1.8 we recommend explicitly installing both `dbt-core` and `dbt-<youradapter>`. This may become required for a future version of dbt. For example:

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

Features and functionality new in dbt v1.9.

### New microbatch `incremental_strategy`

> Incremental models are, and have always been, a *performance optimization —* for datasets that are too large to be dropped and recreated from scratch every time you do a `dbt run`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incremental models are, and have always been, a *performance optimization* — for datasets that are too large to be dropped and recreated from scratch every time you do a `dbt run`.
```

Historically, managing incremental models involved several manual steps and responsibilities, including:

- Add a snippet of dbt code (in an `is_incremental()` block) that uses the already-existing table (`this`) as a rough bookmark, so that only new data gets processed.
- Pick one of the strategies for smushing old and new data together (`append`, `delete+insert`, or `merge`).
- If anything goes wrong, or your schema changes, you can always "full-refresh", by running the same simple query that rebuilds the whole table from scratch.

While this works for many use-cases, there’s a clear limitation with this approach: *Some datasets are just too big to fit into one query.*

Starting in Core 1.9, you can use the new microbatch strategy to optimize your largest datasets  -- **process your event data in discrete periods with their own SQL queries, rather than all at once.** The benefits include:

> - Simplified query design: Write your model query for a single batch of data and no longer need manual filtering for determining "new" records. Use `event_time`, `lookback`, and `batch_size` configurations to generate necessary filters for you, making the process more streamlined and reducing the need for you to manage these details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Simplified query design: Write your model query for a single batch of data. dbt will use your `event_time`, `lookback`, and `batch_size` configurations to automatically generate the necessary filters for you, making the process more streamlined and reducing the need for you to manage these details.
```

While microbatch is in "beta", this functionality is still gated behind an env var, which will change to a behavior flag when 1.9 is GA. To use microbatch:

- Set `DBT_EXPERIMENTAL_MICROBATCH` to `true` in your project
Currently microbatch is supported on these adapters with more to come:

• postgres
• snowflake
• bigquery
• spark
### Snapshots improvements

Beginning in dbt Core 1.9, we've streamlined snapshot configuration and added a handful of new configurations to make dbt **snapshots easier to configure, run, and customize.** These improvements include:

- New snapshot specification: Snapshots can now be configured in a YAML file, which provides a cleaner and more consistent set up.
- New `snapshot_meta_column_names` config: Allows you to customize the names of meta fields (for example, `dbt_valid_from`, `dbt_valid_to`, etc.) that dbt automatically adds to snapshots. This increases flexibility to tailor metadata to your needs.
- `target_schema` is now optional for snapshots: When omitted, snapshots will use the schema defined for the current environment.

> - Standard `schema` and `database` configs supported: Snapshots will now be consistent with other dbt resources. You can specify where environment-aware snapshots should be stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Standard `schema` and `database` configs supported: Snapshots will now be consistent with other dbt resource types. You can specify where environment-aware snapshots should be stored.
```

- Warning for incorrect `updated_at` data type: To ensure data integrity, you'll see a warning if the `updated_at` field specified in the snapshot configuration is not the proper data type or timestamp.

### `state:modified` improvements

> We’ve made a number of improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives/negatives, including:

Reviewer: should we tie these to the behavior change flags mentioned below somehow?
`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values` and  `state_modified_compare_vars`

Author: Note that this was done in [this commit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/1365f9d2fe7c4b370875c308e321c0d5e9c82dd3)

> We’ve made a number of improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives/negatives, including:

Author: Great idea! 
```suggestion
We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives/negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:
```

> We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives/negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:

Author: ```suggestion
We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives and negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:
```

- Added environment-aware enhancements for environments where the logic purposefully differs (for example, materializing as a table in `prod` but a `view` in dev).
- Enhanced performance so that models that use `var` or `env_var` are included in `state:modified`.

### Managing changes to legacy behaviors

> dbt Core v1.9 has introduced flags for [managing changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt Core v1.9 has a handful of new flags for [managing changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.
```

You can read more about each of these behavior changes in the following links:

- (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values` and  `state_modified_compare_vars`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags) .
- (Introduced, disabled by default) new [`skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails` project config flag](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). If the flag is set and **any** `on-run-start` hook fails, mark all selected nodes as skipped
    - `on-run-start/end` hooks are **always** run, regardless of whether they passed or failed last time

> - [Removing a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it will return an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models).

Reviewer: can we add the name of this behavior change flag?

Author: There's no behavior flag here so I am removing. Do you want a release note for this instead, @graciegoheen?

> [Removing a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it will return an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models).

Reviewer: Oh if this isn't a behavior change, let's move it to the "Quick Hits" section instead

> - [Removing a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it will return an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models).

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Adapter specific features and functionalities

### Redshift

> - We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a behavior flag to mitigate any breaking changes.

Author: ```suggestion
- We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a [behavior flag](reference/global-configs/redshift-changes#the-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access-flag) to mitigate any breaking changes. There are no expected impacts to the user experience. 
```

Reviewer: what is the behavior change flag? 
what is the change to the adapter's behavior?

Reviewer 2: @matthewshaver could we merge in that Redshift Behavior Flag PR and link it out there? This way we don't have to do a redirect?

Reviewer 3: Yup! Merging it now. The link will be /reference/global-configs/redshift-changes

> - We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a [behavior flag](/reference/global-configs/redshift-changes#the-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access-flag) to mitigate any breaking changes.

Author: ```suggestion
- We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a behavior flag to mitigate any breaking changes.
```

> - We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a [behavior flag](reference/global-configs/redshift-changes#the-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access-flag) to mitigate any breaking changes. There are no expected impacts to the user experience. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a [behavior flag](/reference/global-configs/redshift-changes#the-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access-flag) to mitigate any breaking changes. There are no expected impacts to the user experience. 

- Support IAM Role auth
```

### Snowflake

- Iceberg Table Format support will be available on three out of the box materializations: table, incremental, dynamic tables. 

### Bigquery

- Can cancel running queries on keyboard interrupt

> - auto-drop intermediate tables created by incremental models to save resources

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Auto-drop intermediate tables created by incremental models to save resources
```

- [dbt Core CLI Installation guide](/docs/core/installation-overview)
- [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud#versionless)

## What to know before upgrading

dbt Labs is committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x. Any behavior changes will be accompanied by a [behavior change flag](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags) to provide a migration window for existing projects. If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).

dbt Cloud is now [versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/versionless-cloud). If you have selected "Versionless" in dbt Cloud, you already have access to all the features, fixes, and other functionality that is included in dbt Core v1.9.
For users of dbt Core, since v1.8 we recommend explicitly installing both `dbt-core` and `dbt-<youradapter>`. This may become required for a future version of dbt. For example:

```sql
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

## New and changed features and functionality

Features and functionality new in dbt v1.9.

> ### New microbatch `incremental_strategy`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Microbatch `incremental_strategy`
```

I think since we already say "new" above, we can cut it from here

> Incremental models are, and have always been, a *performance optimization* — for datasets that are too large to be dropped and recreated from scratch every time you do a `dbt run`.

Reviewer: Thoughts on linking to our docs on incremental models?

https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/incremental-models-overview

Author: sounds good! added in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/fef4db35436c54b2d74a6c3f316570923428954c

- Simplified query design: Write your model query for a single batch of data. dbt will use your `event_time`, `lookback`, and `batch_size` configurations to automatically generate the necessary filters for you, making the process more streamlined and reducing the need for you to manage these details.
- Independent batch processing: dbt automatically breaks down the data to load into smaller batches based on the specified `batch_size` and processes each batch independently, improving efficiency and reducing the risk of query timeouts. If some of your batches fail, you can use `dbt retry` to load only the failed batches.
- Targeted reprocessing: To load a *specific* batch or batches, you can use the CLI arguments `--event-time-start` and `--event-time-end`.

While microbatch is in "beta", this functionality is still gated behind an env var, which will change to a behavior flag when 1.9 is GA. To use microbatch:

- Set `DBT_EXPERIMENTAL_MICROBATCH` to `true` in your project
Currently microbatch is supported on these adapters with more to come:

> 

Reviewer: some weird spacing happening here:
<img width="869" alt="Screenshot 2024-10-02 at 2 52 22 PM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/221efc99-667a-4e48-8c0a-297c32b22e6b">

Author: Hopefully fixed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/74f519c85764adc6c804e9d3cf88fc43810787ea

• postgres
• snowflake
• bigquery
• spark
### Snapshots improvements

Beginning in dbt Core 1.9, we've streamlined snapshot configuration and added a handful of new configurations to make dbt **snapshots easier to configure, run, and customize.** These improvements include:

- New snapshot specification: Snapshots can now be configured in a YAML file, which provides a cleaner and more consistent set up.

> - New `snapshot_meta_column_names` config: Allows you to customize the names of meta fields (for example, `dbt_valid_from`, `dbt_valid_to`, etc.) that dbt automatically adds to snapshots. This increases flexibility to tailor metadata to your needs.

Reviewer: Thoughts on linking to -> https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/build/snapshots#snapshot-meta-fields

Author: added in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/fef4db35436c54b2d74a6c3f316570923428954c

- `target_schema` is now optional for snapshots: When omitted, snapshots will use the schema defined for the current environment.
- Standard `schema` and `database` configs supported: Snapshots will now be consistent with other dbt resource types. You can specify where environment-aware snapshots should be stored.
- Warning for incorrect `updated_at` data type: To ensure data integrity, you'll see a warning if the `updated_at` field specified in the snapshot configuration is not the proper data type or timestamp.

### `state:modified` improvements

We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives and negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:

- Added environment-aware enhancements for environments where the logic purposefully differs (for example, materializing as a table in `prod` but a `view` in dev).

> - Enhanced performance so that models that use `var` or `env_var` are included in `state:modified`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Models that use `var` or `env_var` are included in `state:modified`.
```

### Managing changes to legacy behaviors

dbt Core v1.9 has a handful of new flags for [managing changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.

You can read more about each of these behavior changes in the following links:

> - (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values` and  `state_modified_compare_vars`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags) .

Reviewer: both bullets have the same link, was that intentional?

Author: addressed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/fef4db35436c54b2d74a6c3f316570923428954c

> - (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values` and  `state_modified_compare_vars`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags) .

Reviewer: can we separate these to 2 bullets and give a short blurb about what each of them do (like what we do below for `skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails`)?

Author: addressed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/fef4db35436c54b2d74a6c3f316570923428954c

> - (Introduced, disabled by default) new [`skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails` project config flag](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). If the flag is set and **any** `on-run-start` hook fails, mark all selected nodes as skipped

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Introduced, disabled by default) [`skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails` project config flag](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). If the flag is set and **any** `on-run-start` hook fails, mark all selected nodes as skipped
```

    - `on-run-start/end` hooks are **always** run, regardless of whether they passed or failed last time

## Adapter specific features and functionalities

### Redshift

> - We are changing the adapter's behavior when accessing metadata on Redshift. It’s currently under a [behavior flag](/reference/global-configs/redshift-changes#the-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access-flag) to mitigate any breaking changes. There are no expected impacts to the user experience. 

Reviewer: should this go in the "### Managing changes to legacy behaviors" section?

Reviewer: what are we changing the adapter's behavior _to_?

Author: I found this info and will add more context.

Author: addressed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/fef4db35436c54b2d74a6c3f316570923428954c

- Support IAM Role auth

### Snowflake

- Iceberg Table Format support will be available on three out of the box materializations: table, incremental, dynamic tables. 

### Bigquery

- Can cancel running queries on keyboard interrupt
- Auto-drop intermediate tables created by incremental models to save resources

### Spark

- Support overriding the ODBC driver connection string which now enables you to provide custom connections

## Quick hits

We also made some quality-of-life improvements in Core 1.9, enabling you to:

> - Document [singular data tests](/docs/build/data-tests#document-singular-tests).

Author: ```suggestion
- dbt now returns an an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models) when you [remove a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it.
- Document [singular data tests](/docs/build/data-tests#document-singular-tests).
```

- Use `ref` and `source` in [foreign key constraints](/reference/resource-properties/constraints).

> - `dbt test` supports the `--resource-type` / `--exclude-resource-type` flag, making it possible to include or exclude data tests (`test`) or unit tests (`unit_test`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use `dbt test` with the `--resource-type` / `--exclude-resource-type` flag, making it possible to include or exclude data tests (`test`) or unit tests (`unit_test`).
```

While this works for many use-cases, there’s a clear limitation with this approach: *Some datasets are just too big to fit into one query.*

Starting in Core 1.9, you can use the new microbatch strategy to optimize your largest datasets  -- **process your event data in discrete periods with their own SQL queries, rather than all at once.** The benefits include:

- Simplified query design: Write your model query for a single batch of data. dbt will use your `event_time`, `lookback`, and `batch_size` configurations to automatically generate the necessary filters for you, making the process more streamlined and reducing the need for you to manage these details.
- Independent batch processing: dbt automatically breaks down the data to load into smaller batches based on the specified `batch_size` and processes each batch independently, improving efficiency and reducing the risk of query timeouts. If some of your batches fail, you can use `dbt retry` to load only the failed batches.
- Targeted reprocessing: To load a *specific* batch or batches, you can use the CLI arguments `--event-time-start` and `--event-time-end`.

> While microbatch is in "beta", this functionality is still gated behind an env var, which will change to a behavior flag when 1.9 is GA. To use microbatch:

Reviewer: Could we make this a callout at the top of this microbatch section, I don't want people to miss it!

Author: Done in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/5613080ec82ffaaeec63df38391b87c1d20ca5f3

> - Set `DBT_EXPERIMENTAL_MICROBATCH` to `true` in your project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Set `DBT_EXPERIMENTAL_MICROBATCH` to `true` wherever you're running dbt Core
```

- New snapshot specification: Snapshots can now be configured in a YAML file, which provides a cleaner and more consistent set up.
- New `snapshot_meta_column_names` config: Allows you to customize the names of meta fields (for example, `dbt_valid_from`, `dbt_valid_to`, etc.) that dbt automatically adds to snapshots. This increases flexibility to tailor metadata to your needs.
- `target_schema` is now optional for snapshots: When omitted, snapshots will use the schema defined for the current environment.
- Standard `schema` and `database` configs supported: Snapshots will now be consistent with other dbt resource types. You can specify where environment-aware snapshots should be stored.
- Warning for incorrect `updated_at` data type: To ensure data integrity, you'll see a warning if the `updated_at` field specified in the snapshot configuration is not the proper data type or timestamp.

Read more about [Snapshots meta fields](/docs/build/snapshots#snapshot-meta-fields).

### `state:modified` improvements

> We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives and negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives and negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flag](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that unlocks this improvement:
```

- Added environment-aware enhancements for environments where the logic purposefully differs (for example, materializing as a table in `prod` but a `view` in dev).

### Managing changes to legacy behaviors

dbt Core v1.9 has a handful of new flags for [managing changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.

You can read more about each of these behavior changes in the following links:

> - (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). Set to `True` to start persisting unrendered_database and unrendered_schema configs during source parsing, and do comparison on unrendered values during `state:modified` checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). Set to `True` to start persisting `unrendered_database` and `unrendered_schema` configs during source parsing, and do comparison on unrendered values during `state:modified` checks to reduce false positives due to environment-aware logic when selecting `state:modified`.
```

    - `on-run-start/end` hooks are **always** run, regardless of whether they passed or failed last time.
- (Introduced, disabled by default) [[Redshift] `restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#redshift-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access). If the flag is set the adapter will use the Redshift API (through the Python client) if available, or query Redshift's `information_schema` tables instead of using `pg_` tables.

## Adapter specific features and functionalities

### Redshift

- Support IAM Role auth

### Snowflake

- Iceberg Table Format support will be available on three out of the box materializations: table, incremental, dynamic tables. 

### Bigquery

- Can cancel running queries on keyboard interrupt
- Auto-drop intermediate tables created by incremental models to save resources

### Spark

- Support overriding the ODBC driver connection string which now enables you to provide custom connections

## Quick hits

We also made some quality-of-life improvements in Core 1.9, enabling you to:

> - dbt now returns an an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models) when you [remove a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it.

Author: ```suggestion
- Maintain data quality now that dbt returns an an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models) when someone [removes a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it.
```

- Simplified query design: Write your model query for a single batch of data. dbt will use your `event_time`, `lookback`, and `batch_size` configurations to automatically generate the necessary filters for you, making the process more streamlined and reducing the need for you to manage these details.
- Independent batch processing: dbt automatically breaks down the data to load into smaller batches based on the specified `batch_size` and processes each batch independently, improving efficiency and reducing the risk of query timeouts. If some of your batches fail, you can use `dbt retry` to load only the failed batches.
- Targeted reprocessing: To load a *specific* batch or batches, you can use the CLI arguments `--event-time-start` and `--event-time-end`.

While microbatch is in "beta", this functionality is still gated behind an env var, which will change to a behavior flag when 1.9 is GA. To use microbatch:

- Set `DBT_EXPERIMENTAL_MICROBATCH` to `true` in your project

> Currently microbatch is supported on these adapters with more to come:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Currently microbatch is supported on these adapters with more to come:
```
one more spacing issue!

- `target_schema` is now optional for snapshots: When omitted, snapshots will use the schema defined for the current environment.
- Standard `schema` and `database` configs supported: Snapshots will now be consistent with other dbt resource types. You can specify where environment-aware snapshots should be stored.
- Warning for incorrect `updated_at` data type: To ensure data integrity, you'll see a warning if the `updated_at` field specified in the snapshot configuration is not the proper data type or timestamp.

Read more about [Snapshots meta fields](/docs/build/snapshots#snapshot-meta-fields).

### `state:modified` improvements

We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives and negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:

- Added environment-aware enhancements for environments where the logic purposefully differs (for example, materializing as a table in `prod` but a `view` in dev).

> - Models that use `var` or `env_var` are included in `state:modified`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Models that use `var` or `env_var` in their definition are included in `state:modified` when their values change.
```

    - `on-run-start/end` hooks are **always** run, regardless of whether they passed or failed last time.
- (Introduced, disabled by default) [[Redshift] `restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#redshift-restrict_direct_pg_catalog_access). If the flag is set the adapter will use the Redshift API (through the Python client) if available, or query Redshift's `information_schema` tables instead of using `pg_` tables.

## Adapter specific features and functionalities

### Redshift

- Support IAM Role auth

### Snowflake

- Iceberg Table Format support will be available on three out of the box materializations: table, incremental, dynamic tables. 

### Bigquery

- Can cancel running queries on keyboard interrupt
- Auto-drop intermediate tables created by incremental models to save resources

### Spark

- Support overriding the ODBC driver connection string which now enables you to provide custom connections

## Quick hits

We also made some quality-of-life improvements in Core 1.9, enabling you to:

> - dbt now returns an an error (versioned models) or warning (unversioned models) when you [remove a contracted model by deleting, renaming, or disabling](/docs/collaborate/govern/model-contracts#how-are-breaking-changes-handled) it.

Reviewer: I think we need to re-word slightly since sentence before is "enabling you to:"

"enabling you to dbt now returns..."

Author: addressed in https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6184/commits/33628ebddc5d596f53634ecab75f2f8ee1e1b163

---
title: "Upgrading to v1.9 (beta)"
id: upgrading-to-v1.9
description: New features and changes in dbt Core v1.9
displayed_sidebar: "docs"
---
 
## Resources

> - Changelog INSERT HERE - LINK to 1.9 changelog

Reviewer 4: It will be: https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/blob/1.9.latest/CHANGELOG.md

Author: Inserted in Notion page.

- [dbt Core CLI Installation guide](/docs/core/installation-overview)
- [Cloud upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-dbt-version-in-cloud)

## What to know before upgrading

dbt Labs is committed to providing backward compatibility for all versions 1.x, except for any changes explicitly mentioned on this page. If you encounter an error upon upgrading, please let us know by [opening an issue](https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/new).

> Remember from version 1.8 that we're [going versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/upgrading-to-v1.8#versionless) and we have a new [adapter installation procedure](/docs/dbt-versions/core-upgrade/upgrading-to-v1.8#new-dbt-core-adapter-installation-procedure).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
dbt Cloud is now [versionless](/docs/dbt-versions/versionless-cloud). If you have selected "Versionless" in dbt Cloud, you already have access to all the features, fixes, and other functionality that is included in dbt Core v1.9.

For users of dbt Core, since v1.8 we recommend that you explicitly install both `dbt-core` and `dbt-<youradapter>`. This may become required for a future version of dbt. For example:
```
python3 -m pip install dbt-core dbt-snowflake
```

Author: Added to Notion page!

## New and changed features and functionality

Features and functionality new in dbt v1.9.

### New microbatch `incremental_strategy`

> INSERT HERE - link to docs

Reviewer 4: TODO (assigned to me & Grace):
- https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/6136

Features and functionality new in dbt v1.9.

### New microbatch `incremental_strategy`

Incremental models are, and have always been, a *performance optimization —* for datasets that are too large to be dropped and recreated from scratch every time you do a `dbt run`.

Historically, managing incremental models involved several manual steps and responsibilities, including:

- Add a snippet of dbt code (in an `is_incremental()` block) that uses the already-existing table (`this`) as a rough bookmark, so that only new data gets processed.
- Pick one of the strategies for smushing old and new data together (`append`, `delete+insert`, or `merge`).
- If anything goes wrong, or your schema changes, you can always "full-refresh", by running the same simple query that rebuilds the whole table from scratch.

While this works for many use-cases, there’s a clear limitation with this approach: *Some datasets are just too big to fit into one query.*

> Starting in Core 1.9, you can use the new microbatch strategy to optimize your largest datasets  -- **process your event data in discrete periods with their own SQL queries, rather than all at once.** The benefits include:

Author: ```suggestion
Starting in Core 1.9, you can use the new [microbatch strategy](/docs/build/incremental-microbatch) to optimize your largest datasets  -- **process your event data in discrete periods with their own SQL queries, rather than all at once.** The benefits include:
```

Reviewer 4: blocked on https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6194

> Starting in Core 1.9, you can use the [new microbatch strategy](/docs/build/incremental-microbatch) to optimize your largest datasets  -- **process your event data in discrete periods with their own SQL queries, rather than all at once.** The benefits include:

Author: ```suggestion
Starting in Core 1.9, you can use the new microbatch strategy to optimize your largest datasets  -- **process your event data in discrete periods with their own SQL queries, rather than all at once.** The benefits include:
```

- Simplified query design: Write your model query for a single batch of data and no longer need manual filtering for determining "new" records. Use `event_time`, `lookback`, and `batch_size` configurations to generate necessary filters for you, making the process more streamlined and reducing the need for you to manage these details.
- Independent batch processing: dbt automatically breaks down the data to load into smaller batches based on the specified `batch_size` and processes each batch independently, improving efficiency and reducing the risk of query timeouts. If some of your batches fail, you can use `dbt retry` to load only the failed batches.
- Targeted reprocessing: To load a *specific* batch or batches, you can use the CLI arguments `--event-time-start` and `--event-time-end`.

While microbatch is in "beta", this functionality is still gated behind an env var, which will change to a behavior flag when 1.9 is GA. To use microbatch:

- Set `DBT_EXPERIMENTAL_MICROBATCH` to `true` in your project

> 

Author: ```suggestion
Currently microbatch is supported on these adapters with more to come:

• postgres
• snowflake
• bigquery
• spark
```

* New `snapshot_meta_column_names` config: Allows you to customize the names of meta fields (for example, `dbt_valid_from`, `dbt_valid_to`, etc.) that dbt automatically adds to snapshots. This increases flexibility to tailor metadata to your needs.
* `target_schema` now optional for snapshots: This schema is now optional When ommitted, snapshots will use the schema defined for the current environment.
* Standard schema and database configs supported: Snapshots will now be consistent with other dbt resources You can specify where snapshots should be stored. 
* Warning for incorrect `updated_at` data type: To ensure data integrity, you'll see a warning if the `updated_at` field specified in the snapshot configuration is not the proper data type or timestamp.

### `state:modified` improvements

> INSERT HERE Point me to a resource for this?

Reviewer 4: There's a lot here:
- https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/issues/6185
- https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/issues/9562
- https://github.com/dbt-labs/dbt-core/discussions/10518

@graciegoheen Are you planning to tackle those, or do you want help?

Author: I'll get these drafted in Notion using these resources

Fewer false positives in state:modified
state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values
state_modified_compare_vars

### Deprecated functionality

> INSERT HERE - any deprecated functionality to call out?

Reviewer 4: I don't think there is any - if there were, they should be behind behavior change flags

### Managing changes to legacy behaviors

dbt Core v1.9 has introduced flags for [managing changes to legacy behaviors](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes). You may opt into recently introduced changes (disabled by default), or opt out of mature changes (enabled by default), by setting `True` / `False` values, respectively, for `flags` in `dbt_project.yml`.

You can read more about each of these behavior changes in the following links:

> INSERT HERE! Any behavior changes?

Reviewer 4: @graciegoheen I believe we
- have introduced several new ones that need documenting
- have not "matured" any (changed the default from `False -> True` inv 1.9 relative to v1.8)

Author: addressing in Notion first!

## Quick hits

We also made some quality-of-life improvements in Core 1.9, enabling you to:

- Document [singular data tests](/docs/build/data-tests#document-singular-tests).

> - Use `ref` and `source` in foreign key constraints

Reviewer 4: Link to `/reference/resource-properties/constraints` - this will be updated by #6105 (which I'm working on now)

> - New CLI flag for `dbt test`. Choose which resource types are included or excluded when you run the `dbt test` by including [`--resource-type`/`--exclude-resource-type`](/reference/global-configs/resource-type)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `dbt test` supports the `--resource-type` / `--exclude-resource-type` flag, making it possible to include or exclude data tests (`test`) or unit tests (`unit_test`)
```

Author: updated in Notion and will bring it over here today.

- New CLI flag for [`dbt show`](/reference/commands/show). `--inline-direct` enables you to avoid loading the entire manifest and

> skip rendering any Jinja templates.

Reviewer 4: @graciegoheen I recommend we either don't document this, or document it as "experimental," because I don't think it makes sense for standard dbt workflows and we may need to iterate on it further

Author: Following up with Grace in Notion/Slack

We’ve made improvements to `state:modified` behaviors to help reduce the risk of false positives and negatives. Read more about [the `state:modified` behavior flags](#managing-changes-to-legacy-behaviors) that leverage these improvements:

- Added environment-aware enhancements for environments where the logic purposefully differs (for example, materializing as a table in `prod` but a `view` in dev).

> - Models that use `var` or `env_var` in their definition are included in `state:modified` when their values change.

Reviewer 5: Added to https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6222

You can read more about each of these behavior changes in the following links:

- (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). Set to `True` to start persisting unrendered_database and unrendered_schema configs during source parsing, and do comparison on unrendered values during `state:modified` checks.

> - (Introduced, disabled by default) [`state_modified_compare_vars`](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#behavior-change-flags). Set to `True` if a model uses a `var` or `env_var` in its definition. dbt will be able to identify its lineage to include the model in `state:modified` because the var or env_var value has changed.

Reviewer 5: Added to https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/6222
